# Example /orchestrate run

> /orchestrate is running… research the .claude/ commands 
and subagents to design a careful refactor in which the 
Haiku 4.5 and Opus 4.1 models are used when appropriate and 
otherwise Sonnet 4.5 is used as default 
  ⎿  Allowed 7 tools for this command

● I'll orchestrate a comprehensive workflow to research
  and design a model selection refactor for the .claude/
   commands and subagents.

● Now I'll launch the Research Phase with parallel
  agents investigating different aspects of the current
  architecture:

● Task(Research current command architecture)
  ⎿  Done (15 tool uses · 54.2k tokens · 58.7s)        

● Task(Research agent templates and types)
  ⎿  Done (15 tool uses · 87.6k tokens · 44.7s)        

● Task(Research model capabilities and best practices)
  ⎿  Done (6 tool uses · 27.3k tokens · 1m 47s)        

● Excellent! Now I'll synthesize the research findings
  and move to the planning phase.

● Research Phase Complete

  Parallel research synthesis (3 agents, ~200 words 
  total):

  Key Findings

  Current Architecture:
  - 20 commands, 19 specialized agents, zero model
  selection logic
  - All agents use subagent_type: "general-purpose" with
   behavioral injection
  - Recent enforcement focus (51b5719f): 6 priority
  agents have 26-42 completion criteria
  - Hierarchical coordination: metadata-only passing,
  parallel execution (60-80% time savings)

  Agent Complexity Classification:
  - Lightweight (Haiku 4.5): complexity-estimator,
  metrics-specialist, code-reviewer (read-only, <10s)
  - Planning/Architecture (Opus 4.1): plan-architect (42
   criteria), expansion-specialist, collapse-specialist
  - Default (Sonnet 4.5): research-specialist,
  implementation-researcher, debug-analyst, code-writer,
   test-specialist, doc-writer, spec-updater (10-60s
  execution)

  Model Best Practices (2025):
  - Haiku 4.5: 4-5x faster, 1/3 cost, 73% SWE-bench
  (simple tasks only)
  - Opus 4.1: 74.5% SWE-bench, 82.4% TAU-bench, 5x cost
  (complex reasoning)
  - Sonnet 4.5: 77.2% SWE-bench, best ROI (default
  choice)
  - Recommended pattern: Sonnet orchestrator + Haiku
  workers + Opus for critical validation

  Actionable Insights:
  - Add model metadata to agent definitions
  (.claude/agents/*.md)
  - Implement model selection in command invocation
  logic
  - Preserve execution enforcement patterns (completion
  criteria)
  - Follow orchestration pattern for multi-agent
  commands

  ---
  Now I'll invoke the planning agent to create a
  comprehensive refactoring plan:

> /report is running… Comprehensive model selection refactor
 for .claude/ commands and agents: analyze current 
architecture (20 commands, 19 agents, zero model selection),
 design Haiku 4.5/Opus 4.1/Sonnet 4.5 selection strategy 
following 2025 Anthropic best practices (Sonnet orchestrator
 + Haiku workers pattern), propose implementation approach 
with agent metadata, command invocation updates, and 
backward compatibility. Include decision tree for model 
assignment, cost/performance trade-offs, anti-patterns to 
avoid, and testing strategy for validation. 
  ⎿  Allowed 8 tools for this command

> /report is running… Comprehensive model selection refactor
 for .claude/ commands and agents: analyze current 
architecture (20 commands, 19 agents, zero model selection),
 design Haiku 4.5/Opus 4.1/Sonnet 4.5 selection strategy 
following 2025 Anthropic best practices (Sonnet orchestrator
 + Haiku workers pattern), propose implementation approach 
with agent metadata, command invocation updates, and 
backward compatibility. Include decision tree for model 
assignment, cost/performance trade-offs, anti-patterns to 
avoid, and testing strategy for validation. 
  ⎿  Allowed 8 tools for this command

● I'll create a comprehensive research report on model
  selection refactoring for the .claude/ system.

● Search(pattern: "**/.claude/specs/reports/*.md")
  ⎿  Found 50 files (ctrl+o to expand)

● Search(pattern: ".claude/commands/*.md")
  ⎿  Found 21 files (ctrl+o to expand)

● Search(pattern: ".claude/agents/*.md")
  ⎿  Found 19 files (ctrl+o to expand)

● Read(.claude/docs/concepts/hierarchical_agents.md)
  ⎿  Read 1371 lines

● Now I'll read a few key agent and command files to
  complete my understanding for the report:

● Read(.claude/agents/research-specialist.md)
  ⎿  Read 100 lines

● Read(.claude/agents/plan-architect.md)
  ⎿  Read 100 lines

● Read(.claude/agents/complexity-estimator.md)
  ⎿  Read 100 lines

● Read(.claude/commands/orchestrate.md)
  ⎿  Read 200 lines

● Perfect! Now I have comprehensive information. Let me
  create the research report:

● Write(.claude/specs/reports/074_model_selection_refactor_d
       esign.md)
  ⎿  Wrote 955 lines to .claude/specs/reports/074_model
     selection_refactor_design.md
     # Model Selection Refactor Design: Haiku 4.5, Opus
     4.1, Sonnet 4.5
     ## Metadata
     - **Date**: 2025-10-20
     - **Scope**: Comprehensive model selection strategy
      for .claude/ commands and agents
     - **Primary Directory**: `.claude/`
     - **Files Analyzed**: 20 commands, 19 agents,
     hierarchical agent architecture docs
     - **Research Method**: Codebase analysis + 2025
     Anthropic best practices
     ## Executive Summary
     … +945 lines (ctrl+o to expand)

● Perfect! Research report created. Now updating the
  todo list and moving to the planning phase:

● Planning Phase Complete

  Research report created: .claude/specs/reports/074_mod
  el_selection_refactor_design.md

  The report provides comprehensive analysis including:

  Key Findings

  Current State:
  - 20 commands, 19 agents, zero model selection logic
  - All agents default to system-level model (Sonnet
  4.5)
  - Hierarchical architecture achieves 99% context
  reduction via metadata-only passing

  Model Assignments (from 2025 Anthropic best
  practices):
  - Haiku 4.5 (3 agents): complexity-estimator,
  metrics-specialist, code-reviewer
    - Best for: Read-only analysis, simple scoring,
  pattern matching
    - Benefits: 4-5x faster, 70% cost savings
  - Opus 4.1 (3 agents): plan-architect,
  expansion-specialist, collapse-specialist
    - Best for: Multi-phase planning, architectural
  decisions, complex reasoning
    - Benefits: 82.4% TAU-bench, superior long-horizon
  reasoning
  - Sonnet 4.5 (13 agents): All implementation,
  research, documentation agents
    - Best for: Balanced default for most tasks
    - Benefits: 77.2% SWE-bench (highest score)

  Cost-Performance Trade-off:
  - +20% cost, -32% time (faster workflows, not cheaper)
  - Value proposition: speed improvements via
  orchestration pattern (Sonnet orchestrator + Haiku
  workers + Opus validator)

  Implementation Strategy:
  - Phase 1: Add model metadata to 19 agent frontmatter
  files (2-3 hours, low risk)
  - Phase 2: Create model selection utilities (4-6
  hours, low risk)
  - Phase 3: Update 20 command files for model selection
   (8-12 hours, high risk - requires Task tool API
  changes)
  - Phase 4: Validation and optimization (6-8 hours, low
   risk)

  Next Step: Create Implementation Plan

  Now I'll invoke /plan to create a detailed
  implementation plan based on this research:

> /plan is running… "Implement model selection refactor for 
.claude/ commands and agents: add model metadata 
(haiku-4.5/opus-4.1/sonnet-4.5) to 19 agent files, create 
model selection utilities with validation logic, update 20 
command files to use model preferences, add monitoring 
dashboard, ensure backward compatibility" 
.claude/specs/reports/074_model_selection_refactor_design.md
 
  ⎿  Allowed 6 tools for this command

> /plan is running… "Implement model selection refactor for 
.claude/ commands and agents: add model metadata 
(haiku-4.5/opus-4.1/sonnet-4.5) to 19 agent files, create 
model selection utilities with validation logic, update 20 
command files to use model preferences, add monitoring 
dashboard, ensure backward compatibility" 
.claude/specs/reports/074_model_selection_refactor_design.md
 
  ⎿  Allowed 6 tools for this command

● I'll create a comprehensive implementation plan for
  the model selection refactor, incorporating insights
  from the research report.

● Read(.claude/specs/reports/074_model_selection_refactor_de
      sign.md)
  ⎿  Read 100 lines

● Search(pattern: ".claude/specs/plans/*.md")
  ⎿  Found 70 files (ctrl+o to expand)

● Now I'll create the implementation plan as plan 077:
  ⎿  Interrupted · What should Claude do instead?
