# Academic Tool Chest

Scripts for new video series

## word processor = neovim + config

In addition to filling the cloud-computing role for LaTeX in an accessible way, I've come across enthusiasm among Overleaf evangelists that working in Overleaf provides some clear advantages over working in TexShop, or etc., and I completely see that point. Indeed, I find TexShop to be painfully minimal, succeeding in serving really just one clear role: providing a maximally accessible editor to be included in a LaTeX installation for immediate functionality. That's an important role, don't get me wrong. However, if you are going to write a lot of LaTeX, or would also like to take notes in a lower-stakes language like Markdown, then I don't think it makes sense to live in TexShop, using it as your daily driver. I think something very similar may be said for Overleaf, though there is an important caveat. Let me explain.

I used TexShop for years (yeah, don't know what I was thinking). Then I switched to Sublime Text 3, and what a difference! I could not believe just how much time was wasted working in TexShop, and all the nice tools and features which Sublime provided, vastly reducing the tedium of writing LaTeX. Then I started hearing about VS Code, and although I liked so many things about Sublime, there were certain things that I couldn't get configured in a way that I wanted. What was good about Sublime is that it provided way more functionality right out of the box, and only took another hour or two to configure a bit further given my needs, where all of this I managed to learn on YouTube without much trouble. But hey, if Sublime was good, then I wanted to be sure that VS Code wasn't a whole lot better. But instead of finding detailed comparisons between Sublime and VS Code, most of what I found were comparisons between VS Code (the apparent winner of the [IDE](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Integrated_development_environment) world) with Vim and also with NeoVim (which I'll just call Vim), whatever these were.

Turns out that unlike Sublime, or VS Code, or Atom, or Emacs, etc., Vim is an extremely lightweight text editor. Had I come full circle, returning to something as austere as TexShop? Far from it. It took some research and practice but I am now convinced that writing LaTeX and Markdown in Vim is the future of word processing, at least for academics. I was already using Git to run version control in Sublime, but everything got so much better inside Vim. Not to mention how easy it was to configure Pandoc for converting between file types, and so, so much more. But hang on, there is something Vim can't do, and which does not play nice with Git either, and that is a certain type of cloud-computing where multiple authors can hover about inside the same document. Although I haven't needed to work in this way myself, I respect that many like having this option. Who knows, perhaps someone will write a plugin for Vim which provides this functionality, though at least so far, I am not aware of any such resource.

But let's come back to how accessible Overleaf is, which I take to be important given that one may collaborate with others, and you can't expect everyone to want to play with power tools, or to be adequately up to speed with what would fit most neatly into your workflow. Thus, I see Overleaf filling an important role which deserves to exist. And if you like writing in Overleaf more than TexShop, that's great, but why not learn to use some of what else is out there? If you've already learned LaTeX, I at least found Sublime a synch to learn (maybe VS Code is even better?). Vim is definitely harder--- like two months harder--- but (I claim) well worth it for any academic who is already writing in LaTeX. Moreover, once you have Vim all set up, I'm told that Overleaf has Git compatibility, allowing you to push and pull changes to the cloud (which I guess is basically a repository?). So instead of leaving Overleaf behind, I'm just advocating that anyone looking to spend a lot of time writing invest in expanding their tool kit.

OK but how hard is it to configure Vim for writing LaTeX and Markdown, etc.? Although now it is fairly easy for me depending on what I'm trying to do, it must be admitted that the whole process was very hard. Think of buying a [chassis](http://st.hotrod.com/uploads/sites/21/2014/03/1969-pontiac-gto-judge-body-and-frame.jpg) fit with a drive train and not a whole lot else and building upwards. Anyhow, it took a while, but now I'm really happy, and there is no going back. All of this inspired me to create [resources](https://github.com/benbrastmckie/.config) which one can follow along with, so that in a half hour or so, one can pull down my configuration from GitHub, reproducing my config on your computer. So although it takes a bit of work to install, you get some of that out of the box feeling offered by an IDE. I also go on to explain how to adjust the configuration for yourself, assuming no prior knowledge of how to work in the terminal or use Git, etc., and spell everything out for multiple operating systems. Even so, you will have to devote some time to learning how to use Vim in the first place, and so I provide links to some of the [resources](https://github.com/benbrastmckie/.config/blob/master/CheatSheet.md) that I have come across.

As a parting thought, think of all of this a bit like learning how to touch type so as to use a typewriter when they were first invented, or how to use a computer in order to word process: it's sort of a pain, but pretty easy honestly, and well worth it. If you don't believe me, head over to the [r/vim](https://www.reddit.com/r/vim/) and [r/neovim](https://www.reddit.com/r/neovim/) subreddits to get a sense of the enthusiasm that is out there. So hang on, is Vim new technology? No, but that's a story for another day, and best told by [the author of Vim](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ayc_qpB-93o), or at least [someone else](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yv6KAzRPHkc).

Hope that this helps, or was at least interesting!

### latex for articles

### markdown for notes

## reference manager = zotero + betterbibtex

## version control and backup software = git + github

## email client = neomutt + private secure email service

## website = github pages?
